docs(website): add data model section (#1651)
aerogear/graphback: docs/model/datamodel.md

---
id: datamodel
title: Data Model
sidebar_label: Data Model
---

Graphback generates a GraphQL API and client-side documents using your data models. The data models are represented in the GraphQL Schema language as GraphQL types.

In this section you will learn how to design and configure your data models for use with Graphback and how they can be used for multiple datasources.

## Model

Graphback processes GraphQL Schema types annotated with `@model`.
Adding this annotation to your type will generate CRUD resolvers, services, data providers and client queries following the [GraphQLCRUD](https://graphqlcrud.org) format. For the full annotation definition see [`@model`](./annotations#model).

```graphql
"""
@model
"""
type Note {
  ...
}
```

## Primary key

Graphback requires each data model to have one primary key field which is used to uniquely represent every object in the database.

### PostgreSQL

For PostgreSQL, the default primary key format is `id: ID!`.

```graphql
"""
@model
"""
type Note {
  """Default primary key format for PostgreSQL"""
  id: ID!
  ...
}
```

> 

Reviewer: I think we are missing a little statement like `you can also use [@id](link to id annotation) annotation on field level to provide a custom primary key as shown below`

---
id: datamodel
title: Data Model
sidebar_label: Data Model 
---

> Graphback uses a schema-first approach to generate a GraphQL API and client-side documents using your data models, which are reprented in the GraphQL Schema language as GraphQL types.

Reviewer 2: We are model model-first. Schema first do not modify schema. But we also give code based solutions so best to not mention x-first as this can drive people off

In this section you will learn how to design and configure your data models for use with Graphback and how they can be used for multiple datasources.

> ### @model

Reviewer 2: Enable graphback using..

| `delete` | Optionally specifies whether a `delete` mutation is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(delete: true)` |
| `find` | Optionally specifies whether a `find` query is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(find: false)` |
| `findOne` | Optionally specifies whether a `findOne` query is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(findOne: false)` |
| `update` | Optionally specifies whether a `update` mutation is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(update: true)` |
| `subCreate` | Optionally specifies whether a `new` subscription is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(subCreate: false)` |
| `subUpdate` | Optionally specifies whether an `updated` subscription is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(subUpdate: false)` |
| `subDelete` | Optionally specifies whether a `deleted` subscription is to be generated. Supported values: `true`, `false`. Defaults to `true` | `@model(subDelete: false)` |

> ### @oneToMany

Reviewer 2: Out of the context. you are using reference style here where I would expect to get little bit smooth intro in model and have reference for full raw format

  id: ID!
  text: String!
  author: User
}
```

#### Arguments

| Argument | Description | Example |
|-|-|-|
|`field`| Specifies the name of resolver field on the foreign object. **Required**. Accepts a string value | `@oneToMany(field: 'user'`)|
|`key`| Optionally specifies the name of foreign key field on the foreign object. Accepts a string value. Defaults to `<typeName>Id` | `@oneToMany(field: 'user', key: 'user_key')`|

### @oneToOne

`@oneToOne` is used to define a One To One relationship.

```graphql
type Character {
  id:ID!
  name: String!
  """@oneToOne"""
  cast_actor: Actor!
}

type Actor { ... }
```

This example generates an `character` field on the `Actor` type with a `Character` resolver as well as a `characterId` field internally which can be used to query across relationships.

#### Arguments

| Argument | Description | Example |
|-|-|-|
|`field`| Specifies the name of resolver field on the foreign object. **Required**. Accepts a string value | `@oneToMany(field: 'user'`)|
|`key`| Optionally specifies the name of foreign key field on the foreign object. Accepts a string value. Defaults to `<typeName>Id` | `@oneToMany(field: 'user', key: 'user_key')`|

### @index

> The `@index` annotation can be used to create an index on a specific field or a set of fields at runtime. The supported arguments are different between the different databases. See the variations for [PostgreSQL](#index-1) and [MongoDB](#index-2).

Author: Yeah we can, I just linked to the relevant sections from here since technically it is a common annotation, but implemented differently depending on your database.

> If you have relationships in your models, the relevant foreign keys are automatically indexed by Graphback, so you do not have to index them using `@index`. Similarly, custom primary keys marked with `@id` are also automatically indexed by Graphback.

> 

Author: I think so. I should add it.

> 

Author: This is in the common section already.

> 

Reviewer: I asked if this is true for Mongo because since https://github.com/aerogear/graphback/pull/1565 the support of automatic indexing of “id” was removed. And was wondering how foreign keys indexing are achieved in Mongo also.

## PostgreSQL

> ### ID

Author: I put this heading under PostgreSQL because the documentation will be very different for MongoDB when https://github.com/aerogear/graphback/issues/1626 is implemented.

|`name`| Specifies the name of index. **Optional**. Defaults to `<tablename>_<columnname>_index`. Accepts a string value | `@index(name: 'myIndex'`)|
|`type`| Specifies the index type. **Optional**. Accepts a string value. Supported values: `btree` (default), `hash`, `gist`, `spgist`, `gin` and `brin` | `@index(type: 'hash')`|

### @db

GraphQL Migrations is a library to perform database migrations tables for PostgreSQL using a GraphQL schema. Most of the migration operations can be specified with the `@db` annotation. Check out the docs for [GraphQL Migrations](../docs/databases/migrations) to learn more.

### @default

The `@default` annotation is used to specify a default value. This is currently only supported for PostgreSQL through [GraphQL Migrations](../docs/databases/migrations) package.

```graphql
"""@model"""
type User {
  id: ID!
  """@default(value: false)"""
  verified: Boolean!
}
```

#### Arguments

| Argument | Description | Example |
|-|-|-|
|`value`| Specifies the default value for the field. **Required**. | `@default(value: 1)`|

## MongoDB

### @index

The `@index` annotation can be used to create an index on a specific field or a set of fields at runtime.

> The arguments provided to `@index` are parsed into an [Index Definition](https://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/3.5/api/Collection.html#~IndexDefinition) object and then passed to [db.collection.createIndexes](https://mongodb.github.io/node-mongodb-native/3.5/api/Collection.html#createIndexes). 

Author: I took it from https://github.com/aerogear/graphback/blob/641919dd0d9a15c1699da7048b72b634f072833d/docs/.old/metadata.md#L214

I should probably set up an arguments table like in the others.

From following example data model:

```graphql
"""
@model
"""
type Comment {
  id: ID!
  """

>   @index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Add an index with generated name 
  @index
```

I'll add a comment about what this does since it seems to be missing in this section

  """
  text: String
  """
  @index(
    name: 'compound_index',
    key: {
      text: 1,
      description: 1
    }

>   )

Reviewer: Worth adding a comment about this.

Or briefly explain how to specify a compound index / single index, named index etc

  """
  description: String
}
```

Graphback creates the following indexes on the collection `comment` in a database called `testdb`:

```json
{
  "v": 2,
  "key": {
    "text": 1
  },
  "name": "text_1",
  "ns": "testdb.comment"
},
{
  "v": 2,
  "key": {
    "text": 1,
    "description": 1
  },
  "name": "compound_index",
  "ns": "testdb.comment"
}
```

### @versioned

> The `@versioned` annotation adds two fields to a model: `updatedAt` and `createdAt` which are then automatically managed by Graphback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@versioned` annotation adds two fields to a model: `updatedAt` and `createdAt` timestamps to track document's last update time and creation time. The two timestamps are then automatically managed by Graphback.
```
